Notes from the Open science and communal culture promote women's participation, diversity and discovery paper

Science is currently undergoing a revolution with the focus largely on reproducibility and open science practices. This movement offers an oppportunity to recreate the scientific culture in a more inclusive way. A communal culture that ensures greater participation of women and underrepresented groups are essential for reaping the benefits of social diversity for scientific progress.
We are examining the open science and reproducibility literature across all scientific disciplines to investigate the emerging cultures in the movement to improve science. We
collected a dataset of approximately 3,000 journal articles and conference proceedings published between 2000 and 2017 in these literatures.

Network analyses revealed that  open science literature has a more collaborative structure, where a greater proportion of papers share authors.Semantic analyses of paper abstracts revealed that open science and reproducibility literatures appear to be adopting different cultural practices and frames, namely that the open science literature includes more language reflecting communality and prosociality.

Finally, consistent with the literature suggesting the diversity benefits of open, communal and prosocial purposes, we found that women publish more frequently in high-status author positions (first
or last) within open science compared to reproducibility. We conclude with a list of actionable suggestions for cultivating a collaborative and diverse culture of science.

The​ movement to improve science, to date, can be characterized by two contrasting motifs. One focus has been to assess the reproducibility of previously published scientific results. A second focus is to develop open science practices that facilitate the sharing and reuse of research assets (e.g., data, code) in order to improve rigor and accelerate the rate of scientific discovery. For shorthand we refer to these two literatures as “reproducibility” in the first case, and “open science” in the second.

In this article, we examine whether these two approaches to the improvement of science have embodied different cultures in their (a) interconnectedness and (b) prosocial focus, and whether women’s participation differs across these approaches. We also discuss the implications of our findings with respect to the impact of these cultures on women in science and vice versa.

How to make science more open and more accessible so that women and underrepresented minorities can contribute their valuable perspective.

Open science includes significantly more language that reflects the cultural values of communality and prosociality. We also find that the contributions of women in these literatures differ. Women, for example, are more likely to occupy high-status author positions (taking the first or last position in published papers) within the open science literature than in the reproducibility literature.

We believe that the collaborative, forward-looking aspect of open science has the potential to facilitate greater diversity and inclusiveness. Like all of science, investigators interested in the improvement of science should nurture a culture that attracts and retains a diversity of people.

Results:

We performed both network science and semantic text analyses to establish the structural landscape and cultural foci of the open science and reproducibility literatures and women’s participation in them. To do so, our team analyzed data from Microsoft Academic Graph, consisting of 2,926 scientific articles and conference proceedings (hereafter referred to as “papers”) published between 2010 and 2017 that included “Open Science” or “Reproducibility” as a ​field of study. This sample consisted of 879 Open Science papers and 2,047 Reproducibility papers.

Differences in authors’ community structure in the open science and reproducibility. We analyzed a total of 3,157 unique article author IDs in the Open Science literature and 8,766 in the Reproducibility literature. We built two collaboration networks using these author names (​Figure 1​). Nodes in these networks represent scientific articles, two nodes share an edge if atleast one author appears in both papers (see ​ Methods​ for details). Results revealed that the Open Science network contained 879 nodes and 389 edges, while the Reproducibility network contained 2,047 nodes and 856 edges. Importantly, the Open Science network is more edge dense (0.101%) than the Reproducibility network (0.041%), demonstrating a higher degree of collaboration in the Open Science literature (one-sided Fisher's exact test p ​ < ​ 0.001). We also performed a “connected components analysis” of the network ​ (27, 28)​ to measure the degree of isolation of individual sub-networks of authors within each literature (see ​Methods​). Results show that the Reproducibility network contains more isolated author networks than the Open Science network with 1,641 versus 661 components, respectively (we note that a higher number of components indicates that the network is more disconnected).

In sum, the Open Science literature was found to have a greater number of connections (shared authors) between papers and the Reproducibility literature contains more isolated author networks – and these differences between the two kinds of literature are statistically significant (p ​< ​0.01 as reported above).

Women are more likely to be represented in high-status author positions in the open science literature than in the reproducibility literature.

The single-authored subset includes 255 Open Science papers and 342 Reproducibility papers, while the multi-authored subset includes 624 Open Science papers and 1,705 Reproducibility papers. Due to different field conventions, we consider a scholar to hold a high-status authorship position if they occupy either the first or last author position within a multi-authored paper.​ We find that, overall, women are significantly less likely than men to publish single-author papers in both literatures, based on papers with identifiable author gender. An exact one-sided Binomial test indicated that the
percentage of female single authors (among single-author papers with identifiable author gender) of 33.0% in the Open Science literature and 28.1% in the Reproducibility literature was lower than the expected proportion of 50% (p < 0.001 for both tests). For the remaining analyses we focus on multi-author papers.

Women hold high-status authorship positions in 60.6% of the multiple-author papers in the Open Science literature, compared to 57.9% in the Reproducibility literature (among multi-author papers where female lead authorship could be determined). Note that if women and men were equally represented in first and last author positions, the expected percentage 6of multiple-author papers with a female in a high-status (first or last) author position would be 75% (comprised of a 25% chance of female first and last, a 25% chance of female-first and male-last, and a 25% chance of male-first and female-last).

We performed a regression analysis to better understand gender differences in high-status authorship positions across the two literatures. Specifically, we fit a logistic spline regression model controlling for time trends, team size, and manuscript type (i.e., journal article, conference proceedings).

Thus, whereas women are underrepresented in high-status author positions in both literatures, there is significantly greater representation of female authors in high-status author positions in the Open Science literature than in the Reproducibility literature. Additionally, we fit the model controlling for the academic field of study (i.e., mathematics, biology, medicine) and found similar effects.

Team size and women’s representation in high-status positions in multi-author papers. Women’s representation in high-status authorship positions (first and last authorship) is affected differently by team size in the open science and reproducibility literatures. Women more frequently assume high-status positions in both smaller and larger teams in Open Science, while they do so in only in larger teams in the Reproducibility literature.

Women’s participation over time is increasing in open science and decreasing in reproducibility.​ Our regression analysis reveals that in the Open Science literature, the representation of women in high-status authorship positions (first or last author) has grown over time, while it has declined or failed to increase in the Reproducibility literature. We find that the odds of a woman holding a high-status position in the Open Science literature has grown at a rate of approximately 15.6% (p<0.01) year-over-year from 2010 to 2017 controlling for team size and manuscript type.

a. Women participation and team size.​ Women have higher rates of high-status authorship in larger teams within Reproducibility, while rates are comparatively and consistently high in Open Science across team sizes. ​ 

b. Women participation over time. ​ In Open Science, the representation of women in high-status positions has grown over time, while in Reproducibility it has declined. Values are logistic regression estimates shown on the probability scale, with 95% confidence intervals indicated in grey.

Text analyses suggest that the explicit culture of the open science and reproducibility literatures are different.​ The Open Science abstracts included more communal and prosocial words than the Reproducibility abstracts (Open Science mean ​ density of 2.4%, median density 1.8%; Reproducibility mean density 0.9%, median density 0.0%). ​ A two-sided permutation test for differences in the mean
and median scores in each dataset shows that the Open Science literature includes significantly more frequent use of communal and prosocial words than does the Reproducibility literature (p<0.001 for mean and median).

Distribution of communal and pro-social word density of abstracts in the Open Science and Reproducibility literatures​. Abstracts in the Open Science literature include significantly more words associated with communality and prosociality than those in the Reproducibility literature.

Our results reveal that the movement to improve science consists of two relatively independent groups with differing approaches: (a) Open Science and (b) Reproducibility. These literatures have relatively few common authors and show significantly different community structures of how authors contribute to individual papers. Whereas the Open Science literature is significantly more interconnected with respect to co-authorship, the Reproducibility literature contains more distinct groupings of coauthors. We find that women are more likely to be represented in high-status author positions in the Open Science literature than in the Reproducibility literature. Interestingly, team size seems to be associated with women’s leadership positions in both Open Science and Reproducibility, suggesting that a more
collaborative scientific model may promote women’s participation. Our analysis of women’s participation over time reveals that it is increasing in Open Science and decreasing in Reproducibility. Lastly, our semantic text analyses suggest that the nature of explicitly prosocial cultures in the Open Science and Reproducibility literatures differ. Open Science abstracts include more explicitly communal and prosocial terms than do Reproducibility abstracts.

Today’s science relies on teams coordinating their efforts to share insights and methods, build on past work, and develop new questions and approaches. These collaborative and complementary processes occur locally (e.g., direct work with other laboratories) as well as globally (e.g., broadening the scientific community, sharing equipment, data, and access).
Science today is more likely to be a collaborative than individual endeavor, where team size can matter. Indeed, larger and more diverse teams may be necessary to realize higher impact​.

A second problem suggested by these findings is that non-communal practices and values may deter people who value communal, interdependent, and prosocial goals, including women, underrepresented minorities, first-generation college students, and communally-oriented men. If the movement to improve science is to harness this diversity, the Open Science focus currently appears to be more welcoming and inclusive than Reproducibility​.

A problem, however, is that while science today is increasingly team-based, homophily processes mean that many of these teams are likely to be relatively homogeneous with regard to sociodemographic, behavioral, and intrapersonal characteristics​. During this time of transition away from solo work or small, siloed teams, we are witnessing a culture clash across the disciplines between the traditional culture of science–focused on competition and individualism–and the new culture of collaboration, cooperation, and sharing across the disciplines and across the globe.
Indeed, there is an increasing appreciation among scientists and funding agencies that multidisciplinary “team science” is required to tackle the most pressing scientific, social, and health problems of our times. Over the last decade, organizations including NIH, NSF and others have dedicated resources to facilitating team science. The complexity of the problems we are now facing in science demand the expertise of multiple disciplines working in coordinated fashion. For example, addressing the problem of opioid addiction requires the integrated knowledge of researchers who specialize in
pain, addiction, neuroscience, economics, computer science, psychology, sociology, biochemistry, demography, medicine, and public health, just to name a few. Intellectually diverse, multidisciplinary teams create new insights by combining existing knowledge in innovative ways. In fact, data ​from the U.S. Patent and Trademarks Office show that patents generated by teams represented more breakthroughs, landing among the top 95% of all cited patents, than those from lone inventors, suggesting their generative contributions.
Similarly, multi-authored articles are more often cited than single-authored articles ​and while some have argued that this could be due to self-citation, others have suggested that it is more likely that highly collaborative projects include more diverse data and higher quality ideas, which result in greater impact. Importantly, it has also been suggested that whereas large teams advance science and technology, small teams can disrupt the established scientific understanding. Both types of contributions seem to be of fundamental importance.

Establishing a communal culture can increase diverse participation: an example from structural biology. Reproducibility became a focus point of the structural biology research community following the retraction of 5 articles in the journal Nature. In the aftermath, the community pushed for raw data submission, evaluation tools and standards to increase reproducibility and check quality of protein structures. While not perfect, the structural biology community -- with its established broader participation of women and open culture -- is a success story, demonstrating that diversity, openness and team science can promote scientific progress, as evidenced by the changes designed to strengthen scientific practice that were implemented following the paper retractions.

More diversity can benefit science. The social diversity (e.g., gender and racial diversity) of teams can confer benefits to creativity, innovation, and accurate decision-making. Particularly important for the effort to improve science is that socially diverse scientific teams are more likely to generate innovation. Teams with more gender and cultural diversity are more likely to develop new products and introduce radical innovations to market. In the domain of intellectual contributions, an analysis of the ethnic identities of authors of 1.2 million scientific papers published between 1985 and 2008 found that papers written by diverse groups received more citations and had higher impact factors than papers written by people from the same ethnic group. Yet the mere presence of socially diversity is not always sufficient to foster equal participation of diverse social groups. Indeed, the potential of social diversity often goes untapped, leading to null or negative results on group performance. For example, a large-scale analysis of contemporary scientific articles found that women were significantly more likely to be associated with technical tasks, whereas men were associated with conceptual
tasks. Similarly, in gender-diverse engineering teams, female students were underrepresented in presenting technical content while male students were overrepresented.

T​o capitalize on the potential of social diversity, contexts need to directly address the challenges that can accompany social diversity. For example, interactions and communication within diverse teams may be more difficult. There is great potential of social diversity to produce better and more innovative outcomes, particularly in complex tasks: Socially diverse teams encode and process information more accurately, especially when sharing disparate facts is a requirement for success. The mere presence of people from socially diverse backgrounds alters the cognition and behavior of majority group members that lead to more improved and accurate thinking and communication. In the presence of social diversity, majority group members raise more facts and make fewer factual errors; when errors are made,
they are more likely to be corrected. When questions and dissent are raised in socially diverse teams, it provokes more thought and consideration than when the exact same concerns are raised in homogenous teams. The presence of other underrepresented group members can foster greater participation from other underrepresented group members: One example is that gender-diverse teams with more women foster women’s active participation in team projects, whereas teams that are comprised of mostly men often render women silent.

The emerging movements to improve science. The psychological and brain sciences (PBS) are at the forefront of efforts to redefine the rules and standards of science. There is much to learn from this emerging movement and several other fields are already taking similar stock, including biostatistics​, computer science, and medicine. Consistent with a communal, prosocial cultural framework, fields with more established interdependent and collaborative scientific practices have enjoyed a positive evolution in scientific quality and discovery. For example, the movement toward team science can be
observed in theoretical and experimental physics where investigative necessity has promoted large-scale consortia and successful models of scientific collaboration. With respect to structural biology, the establishment of standards for data sharing and deposition (see for example CCP4​ and RCSB​) coincided with broader participation of women in the field.

In sum, Open Science has the seed of a communal and sharing culture that, if cultivated, may be especially attractive to women and other underrepresented groups. We believe that the collaborative forward-looking aspect of open science has the potential to facilitate diversity and inclusiveness in two ways. First, the sharing of code, data and resources lowers the barriers and entry cost to the participation in science, thus establishing a more equal playing field and enhancing the inclusion of underrepresented groups - for example, scientists working in minority-serving institutions with less access to funding and other resources. Second, a culture of sharing, interdependence, and collaboration is consistent with research (cited above) that suggests these cultural features are more attractive to women, people of color, and communally-oriented men. In contrast, the culture that has come to characterize some of the reproducibility focus appears to be consistent with individualistic
values that has traditionally turned away these underrepresented groups. An important speculation not fully addressed by our analyses is that women may have a reduced participation in the reproducibility movement because they might be less willing to adopt a finger-pointing posture (personal communication, M. McNutt). This is consistent with our claims on women choosing to participate in more open, communal cultures. More research will be necessary to address this issue, including overcoming the difficulties in ascertaining author gender.

To be sure, reflecting and learning from within ​a cultural shift is difficult. The analysis we offer here suggests that we can still do more to improve science through social diversity. We propose that the benefits of team science will be realized when such teams are both socially and intellectually diverse and operate in contexts that welcome and pursue diversity, so that innovation, creativity, and the quality of science can flourish–despite an initial period of adjustment and discomfort. Science needs the participation of women and other underrepresented groups.

The goals and ideals of open science have the potential to promote diversity and broader scientific participation. However, the promise of these emerging cultural trends is not yet a certainty; indeed, some features of the dominant scientific culture can deter participation among the very individuals who may contribute to the strength of diverse thinking. By fostering cultural change toward prosocial values, sharing, education, and cross-disciplinary cooperation, rather than independence and competitiveness, the movement to improve science may lead to greater knowledge generation, democratization, and
inclusiveness in science.

Individual researchers can learn about the who, when, how and why of their teams, including attending to the range of people presented, identifying opportunities to include diverse voices, and analyzing reasons for and barriers or groups or individuals to participate in the team. Organizations that highlight the collaborative and communal aspects of scientific processes and success can feature connections in science, acknowledge how others help overcome stumbling blocks, and reward teams that embody the values of open science. Each researcher can work toward broadening collaboration and
mentoring networks both in terms of collaborating with a range of established researchers and actively including underrepresented groups. We encourage readers and all members of the scientific community to embrace a learning mindset regarding team science and socially diverse teams: Science continually has more to teach, and the rewards of a cultural shift are not free; they come from investments of time, energy, and understanding.





